Joel Grayson: Okay, so
Joel Grayson: does everyone want to introduce themselves? I'll start. I'm eleventh grader at Riverdale.
Joel Grayson: Really excited about this meeting. I we've been planning for a while now. And
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: why don't you call on people? Joel?
Dan Schultz: Yeah, that makes sense.
Joel Grayson: Hi! My name's Lexia. I'm also in the eleventh grade I Riverdale.
Joel Grayson: I'm Rachel. I'm. Also in eleventh grade. And yeah, i'm excited to be here.
Joel Grayson: Oh, yeah.
Talia Proshan: yeah, i'm tall. I go to Fields and i'm also in eleventh grade.
theoaborn: Oh, hi! I'm sto i'm also in eleventh grade, and i'm at a Riverdale.
Joel Grayson: and this is, can so I guess if you want to go.
Angela Costanzo: sure i'm Angela Costanzo. I am a sustainability coordinator here at the Hill Campus, and I'm here to support Joel and and the team.
Okay.
Joel Grayson: And who's Mr. Schultz?
Dan Schultz: Dan Shultz. I've been talking to Joel for quite a while. I enjoy my meetings with him in the cafeteria.
Don: I'm glad to be part of this.
Don: I'm sorry, Big deal. I'm I work for Selby Bus. I've been with Sully, for
Don: I think this is my eleventh year. Prior to that I was a consultant.
Don: I've done management consulting for decades. I work for fortune 300 companies at Dp. Level, and
Don: very happy to be in this industry, and i'm actually very excited about electric vehicles so
Don: hopefully. I can add some value to this meeting.
Joel Grayson: Right
Joel Grayson: sorry. This is Kelly Alison Flynn, assistant head of School for operations at Riverdale Don. I think we've spoken before, especially during the Covid times, and I think we should just jump right in.
Joel Grayson: This is a phenomenon sweeping the nations like your school license is first electric school uses in 1994, but now one of all school buses are electric, which is small, but the new buses that are being bought are increasingly electric. So let's just get started with the presentation. I'm sure you're
Joel Grayson: aware of many of these benefits. But
Joel Grayson: let's just make sure we're on the same page.
Joel Grayson: So
Joel Grayson: there are 3 main benefits for electric school buses, which is the environmental. the health and the savings benefits.
Joel Grayson: And Theo. my good friend Theo, we'll we'll start off with the health benefits.
theoaborn: Thanks, Joe and I'll just let you know when to change last.
Joel Grayson: Yeah.
theoaborn: Awesome. So obviously all of us here, either being students or being in the business of helping students want to keep children safe. The next slide
theoaborn: Diesel exhaust
theoaborn: is very dangerous, and it is releasing chemicals that very negatively affect children. Primarily, children. They affect
theoaborn: everybody breathing them in. But because children are so vulnerable as they're developing, it affects them the most next slide.
theoaborn: So this is just Alyssa. Some of the chemicals going into the air. Obviously it's also very bad for the environment which we will talk about later, but
theoaborn: directly for what I'm talking about. This is affecting the health of students, of bus drivers and of people who are. Maybe they live next to one of the hill schools, or they live next to one of the routes
theoaborn: that all those people are breathing in these chemicals next slide.
theoaborn: So in like
theoaborn: one side of the spectrum, with the more the most dangerous and the most
theoaborn: deadly problems. Studies have shown that, being a bus driver for only 3 months is associated with an increased risk of 6 separate types of cancer
theoaborn: and all types of tumors.
theoaborn: Additionally, New Yorkers. So in our city who are living near bus routes. They have an increased rate of emergency calls for respiratory diseases, so that's just going to show how dangerous these fumes are.
theoaborn: Additionally, school buses.
theoaborn: as I said, are producing this Diesel exhaust. And then that goes into the school. As Joel said, we really appreciate you guys making an effort to not be idling outside.
theoaborn: because that does help a lot. But at the same time we still do have a fleet of buses coming towards the school, and dropping off these kind of calls which
theoaborn: is releasing less chemicals than they would if they were idling. But it's still releasing these chemicals and going into the systems of students. So next slide.
theoaborn: So, then, this is also going to be affecting them academically in 2 main ways. So first off studies show that higher pollution is directly related to more missed schools, the more more missed school days.
theoaborn: because students have a weaker lungs, which means that it is far easier for them to get sick
theoaborn: additionally, and in my opinion.
theoaborn: very, very scary. The all defined particles in this pollution are able to actually basically go into students brains, and that can be
theoaborn: notably lower test scores, because brain development and attention spans are both lowered significantly, and that is obviously very dangerous. And I don't think that anybody really wants that to happen.
theoaborn: Yeah.
Joel Grayson: yeah, I just wanted to add, there was a study between in in a school where they took
Joel Grayson: normal Diesel vehicles, and then they also retrofitted those vehicles, so they wouldn't emit as much. both inside the bus and outside. And that's where the the
Joel Grayson: suppose the conclusion came that test scores are lower when you have more Diesel fume emissions in the school bus.
Joel Grayson: So so that's where the academic part comes in.
Joel Grayson: Sorry continue for you.
theoaborn: Oh, no, that was. That was the part about health.
Joel Grayson: Okay, thank you.
Joel Grayson: Next, Talio will be talking about the environmental benefits.
Talia Proshan: Yes. so environmental benefits of having electrical buses
Talia Proshan: next slide.
Talia Proshan: so mainly there wouldn't be the buses wouldn't be emitting dangerous chemicals like Co. 2 and nitrous oxide, and aside from manufacturing, heating, and electricity production. This would really lower the net emissions
Talia Proshan: currently in Manhattan, in the Bronx have an f on air quality which is really bad so hopefully this could improve that also. This would save 17 metric tons of Co. 2 each year, which is the same as about 3 New Yorkers. How much they emit annually.
Joel Grayson: I think Joel was gonna talk. Yes, so there's also through the vehicle to grid program. Electric school buses stabilize the grid through something called valley filling and peak shading, which essentially means that during the summer, when they're not being used.
Joel Grayson: or if they are being used when they're parked, at least they are helping to stabilize the grid.
Joel Grayson: because at high demand for electricity they actually put electricity back into the grid.
Joel Grayson: and when electricity is at low demand they take in electricity, this being in the night time, and so the effect is that at
Joel Grayson: peak demand
Joel Grayson: it helps the grid meet that supply or that load, and when when there's not enough, demand it, access that demand. And so the reason this is nice is, first of all.
Joel Grayson: you end up actually saving money on the grid and making money for for the electric school bus owner. But also this means that there's less of reliance on fossil fuels during energy peaks, because during these energy peaks.
Joel Grayson: oil and natural gas power plants need to fill in.
Joel Grayson: because renewables can't just increase their production. And so, for these reasons validate valid filling and peak shaving would save
Joel Grayson: fossil fuel usage.
Talia Proshan: In addition, switching to electrical buses would fulfill 10 out of the 17 UN sustainable development goals, such as good health and well being quality, education, reduce inequalities, decent work and economic growth and more.
Joel Grayson: All right. Now i'm going to talk about economics
Joel Grayson: when purchasing buses directly
Joel Grayson: electric school bus costs $370,000 as a up from cost. There are many Federal state and local incentives which decrease this cost, including.
Joel Grayson: for example, Volkswagen's Environmental Mitigation Trust, which is a company that actually has to pay money for electric school buses, Nice, cert up from the State
Joel Grayson: and the Clean school bus program, which was recently passed by the Biden Administration and dozens of other incentives, which are case by case basis, and grants as well. They're also low interest loans available, such as from the coalition for green capital
Joel Grayson: and other places and
Joel Grayson: well, it's a high upfront cost, because operating costs and maintenance costs are lower.
Joel Grayson: You can see i'll get back to that side. But in green you have the cost of an electric school bus, and in gray you have the cost of a Diesel bus. You can see the upfront cost is higher, but over time you end up having to pay less for for maintenance and for fuel. And so this means that.
Joel Grayson: at least for a line electric bus. This is a quote, by the way, from a few years ago. The return on investment is 9 years now. This doesn't keep in mind the incentives. If there were incentives applied to this, it would be even lower
Joel Grayson: might even be like year 2.
Joel Grayson: And
Joel Grayson: that's the basic idea behind the financing. So the operating costs. You could see the fuel here for a Diesel bus. Last time I checked it'd be around 14 cents per mile with the gas surges, though it could be even higher, as we saw recently in current events and
Joel Grayson: for electric buses it is, it is lower.
Joel Grayson: It is a lower cost to go per mile when running on electricity than in gasoline or Diesel.
Joel Grayson: Same thing with maintenance, because electric school buses have fewer moving parts. They don't need to be repaired as often, so it's it's cheaper for maintenance
Joel Grayson: and another way to get electric school buses in is, instead of buying them directly
Joel Grayson: you can, instead subscribe to a service which will provide them for you.
Joel Grayson: An example is Highland Fleet subscription program, where there would be no upfront costs. But you would simply pay $20,000 per year to have the buses
Joel Grayson: and Highland Fleet subscription would sort of take out the risk from everything, so it would cover the maintenance and complexity. If
Joel Grayson: there's installation that needs to happen, it would also cover that. And there are other developers that do this.
Joel Grayson: such as Lev. Mobility, e. Trans energy and amplitude.
Joel Grayson: So this is better for
Joel Grayson: getting rid of that upfront cost.
Joel Grayson: There's also charging infrastructure which would need to be installed. It could be level, one level, 2 DC. Charging.
Joel Grayson: It seems to me, from the research. I did that level. One would make the most sense, because it's the cheapest. And by charge you buses overnight we wouldn't need to
Joel Grayson: have the fastest available charger, you know just we need to have charger that could do the job overnight, and that's what level one can do. And you know there are more details about this. I could let you know if you wanted, and also through the vehicle to brid program offered by Con Edison. You would end up
Joel Grayson: saving money for Con Edison and and their agreements that could be made
Joel Grayson: to capitalize off of the fact that the bus could use as a battery when it's not being used to stabilize the grid.
Joel Grayson: for Tara knew if Abd and other companies our providers of charging infrastructure.
Dan Schultz: Joe, what would how much time would it take for a bus to charge overnight? Would it be 2 h, 3 h? Would it take a full 8 and just i'm just curious. Is that so? It depends what charging we have Level One is the slowest level, 2 faster, and DC. Is like
Joel Grayson: super fast, but this is increasing in in price as well. So, for level one it is.
Joel Grayson: I have
Joel Grayson: talk about
Joel Grayson: charging.
Joel Grayson: If I can find it.
Joel Grayson: I believe
Joel Grayson: Don't quote me. Let me just find it.
Joel Grayson: You could. If it's just a swig, you know it's it's fine. Yes, 5 miles of range per hour for a level One charger, because it's a 120 volts a/C level. 2 chargers is 25 miles of range per hour.
Joel Grayson: and DC is like in 1 h you can get the whole thing. So.
Joel Grayson: So yeah, if it's charging overnight level, one would make sense. But again it I don't know what roots we're gonna take. But if you want a longer group, then maybe level 2. So
Dan Schultz: yeah, Gotcha. Thank you.
Joel Grayson: Yeah.
Joel Grayson: Okay. Moving on to manufacturers. So one of the nice things about electric school buses is that it's the exact same bus model as you could see here with Bluebird.
Joel Grayson: It's just a different engine, so it's the same bus just instead of a Diesel gas combustion engine. It's it's an electric engine, and this means it could be the exact same model, same size, same specifications for everything. And so the manufacturers for that are Thomas Bill Buses buying Electric Blue Bird, and I saw
Joel Grayson: for super service models that that I was looking at. I believe they have the exact same model that that super self is already using just with an electric engine instead.
Joel Grayson: And now for good publicity.
Joel Grayson: it's just a bonus.
Joel Grayson: which is that this is still quite a new area. So if we were to do this, we'd be pioneers, and it it would be furthering the mission of the hill schools, which is to be called innovators and and responsive to climate change.
Joel Grayson: and also public schools of the New York State are transitioning to 100% electric by 2,035.
Joel Grayson: They're already working on their transition. They've fought a lot of electric but school buses, and
Joel Grayson: it would be nice to not be behind public schools.
Joel Grayson: All right. That's it for the presentation.
Joel Grayson: Now
Joel Grayson: I was thinking, we have a discussion. I I want to hear your thoughts. I could also bring up a case study at White Plains. If you want white planes. Did a school bus transition in 2,018, and
Joel Grayson: let me just put the case. Study
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: the chats. One question before we talk about white planes. What's the length of service of a bus, whether a Diesel bus or an electric bus.
Joel Grayson: So they're both 12 year. They have a 12 year lifespan.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: That's what you that's your
Don: yeah, I mean, I would say, 12 is probably
Don: the end, you know
Don: it could go further. The those Diesel buses can last for 50 years.
Don: We wouldn't use them at our Cs for that that timeframe. Trust me, I think our oldest bus in our Cs is 9 years old.
Joel Grayson: Okay.
Don: so. But again we we do like, for since you know.
Don: we're retiring probably 4 buses this year. and you know it's funny, because, regardless of what our strategy is. you can't make a purpose right now without thinking
Don: about Ev. Right. So as of 2027. You can't even purchase Diesel anymore, and you want
Don: so for us you know we we talk quite a bit. We we work. We buy a lot of equipment off one of those manufacturers that you probably screen Joel and
Don: and you know, yeah, so that you know there the advice from them is.
Don: Let's make a decision on what to buy. As we approach 2,027 I mean I think the big thing for them is
Don: what's the technology gonna look like in 5 years, right?
Don: What's top technology gonna look like by 2,027 we don't know. You know, the again. The media fact we work with is not sure that all of New York City and all of New York State can all go electric at the same time
Don: like what's what's the what's the instruction look like. and what's the impact to the grid. because not everything is going to be peak and valley right? So it's just going to be drawing from the grid.
Don: So I get it for us, you know. I mean, since we made is is built on what's gonna happen? Electronic vehicles are inevitable, right?
Don: So it's just just question how you transition and Joe like your presentation. How fast do we transition that? Rcs
Don: and that's the 1 billiondollar question, Like if we if we do by
Don: 2 vehicles this year, for example, we're probably gonna get vehicles that are.
Don: you know, 4 or 5 years old that we know we're gonna retire them, you know, with 8 or 9 years when we have to.
Don: So yeah, it's an interesting, you know, conversation, but every every decision we make has to be based on the future electronic vehicles. We even looked at more property to purchase.
Don: to part our vehicles, and you can make those decisions anymore. You just can't buy an empty parking lot anymore, right?
Don: You have to buy a lot that can.
Don: You can already envision that you're gonna use it for Ev in 2 3 years down the road.
Don: So
Don: so yes, definitely. Some we think about. I think our limitation. It's super savvy.
Don: and therefore our Cs for span fields then
Don: is, you know we're just, we of not being able to get the grants right. So when you, when you hear about Federal law, you know from infrastructure. You know the big bills that are coming out of the Us. Government.
Don: They disseminate that money through local school districts. It's like a white plains. Joel, we're really
Don: we're at this advantage versus white planes, because white planes is getting a lot of this money. You know whether it's their pilot that they did 18,
Don: or even the future, where they gonna get a lot of these billions from
Don: from Joe biden, you know. So again.
Don: you know for us we we have applied, you know, all's not lost all those not lost being a private bus fleet.
Don: We do qualify for the the nice sort of grants.
Don: So we've already applied for those, and we already have access to those as well as the Volkswagen decision. So the money is there, but it just comes down to basic math. Unfortunately.
Don: like you know you, you're pricing. The bus is that 307,000.
Don: Well, they're over 400 now. So but there's no question. In in fact, the school buses are bad. It's. You know the vans that we use. Joel. it's actually on like 5 x. We can get those vans for about 65,000 if they're gas powered versus 250,000. If they're electronic vehicles you're talking about. The
Dan Schultz: Those are the many events like the 25 passenger
Don: all the lower school bands at Rcs and horseman and fields. And they actually use the nice Mix Lower school
Don: and middle of the school or so. That's where it's actually a little bit more.
Don: The math doesn't quite add up. There's no no doubt that the maintenance is much cheaper, Dan. It's like maintaining a gold card.
Don: It's i'm not saying I could do it, but it's it's much simpler than a gas powered engine or Diesel powered in.
Joel Grayson: I see. So
Joel Grayson: are you saying you would be easier to transition with the smaller
Don: like type a buses.
Don: you know, full size bus. We actually try to avoid Diesel even in our full size buses.
Joel Grayson: Hmm.
Don: So just because it's a little bit less expensive, and it's more. It's easier to work on than a Diesel bus.
Don: But yeah, the theans unfortunately, the bad cost again you can get a van for about 60 65,000.
Don: I mean those vans that we use. They just really.
Don: They're pick up trucks with styrofoam. I'm a you know it just just built up the back, but it's really just a forward f 350. Pick up truck or a chevy silverado. I've already inexpensive to utilize the purchase.
Don: But the electron, the technology for Ev would make it like 5 X.
Don: So it doesn't even that does that up as well as the big bus screen
Joel Grayson: got it.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: So one thing I'm hearing from Don is that the public private divide is part of the obstacle here, so that feels like a an action item for the students here. So you know who who do we need to write to? How do we? How do we work on that? To support decision making
Don: a another question I have is I I hadn't heard about the the sort of like lease rental, you know the Highland Fleet subscription, so that Excuse me, subscription program done how it I mean, do you know much about that? And how does that? So you know it's, you know. Actually, it's funny because policing leasing vehicles is something we've talked about for a long time.
Don: you know. I mean, you know, if if
Don: let's say we, we partner with the school like the municipality that we'll actually purchase the vehicles and lease them to us. I mean, that's a viable option. you know, if it's gonna cost us the purchase price.
Don: you know. I guess you just really have to do the math, you know, if the least price 30,000 a year. That's essentially all the operating margin we have on the route.
Don: you know, versus financing a bus that. And years later we'll, you know we tend to. We tend to finance a bus over 3 years.
Don: So by year, 4 by year, 5, my year 6. We don't have those in direct costs related to ownership.
Don: I mean it's a. It's a capital purchase, so we we look at for over 5 years. But
Don: so it's it's a lot of math involved, and it's good at some point. It's going to add up Kelly. It's it's inevitable. The math is going to be there.
Don: You see the price of electronic vehicles come down. We're hopeful. But yeah, you're right, you know. Can we really compete against white planes.
Don: you know? Probably not. Now, Don't. I mean, how many more vehicles have? They added in 2,018, you know.
Don: Yeah, we started off with like 4 or 5 or something small, right?
Joel Grayson: You know. They sent us this information. I don't have anything besides that. But but they did do a pilot program starting in 2,018 and
Joel Grayson: and yes, it is a public school, and i'm. Curious what the divide is, but but
Don: this is also in the agenda I sent you. It's talks about how their transition was
Joel Grayson: a lot of specifics about vehicle to grid program. They did it with line electric, and they were able to set up a a deal with move and and vehicle to grid and excuse me with Con Edison as well to
Joel Grayson: get incentives that way, too, and they they They made money savings from the vehicle to grid, and
Joel Grayson: seems like their transition went pretty smoothly.
Joel Grayson: and it worked. That was the main thing, because they were one of the first people to do it. And then it was these questions.
Don: You'll find a lot of case studies out there, I mean.
Don: I'm from Massachusetts right. My brother lives in in Beverly, Massachusetts, which is just north of Boston on the coast. and they're They're slowly going to electronic vehicles as well.
Don: but literally it's like 7 of their 48 vehicles are now electronic.
Don: They have 4 more next year. So it's something that i'm not saying it's not worth doing right. But
Don: you know you see a lot of
Don: you know tabs, even private
Don: contractors, that sort of get their toll on the water. They'll buy a handful of electronic vehicles. And and you're right. It's great publicity when you do it.
Don: You know what one of our friendly of what the you know, the companies that we're friendly with Logan, if you've heard of Logan Bus company. So if you're in New York City you don't log in.
Don: Logan went on. Bought like a half dozen of them.
Don: Yeah, when they got them on the road. They have the mayor show up, you know. Local councilman.
Don: the Borough Presidents, You know anyone that was important.
Joel Grayson: I I didn't get that invite. So so. But yeah, so we'll get there too. But we so a lot of it now is just sort of there.
Don: you know. They're trying to show that They're moving the right direction by buying a handful
Don: so. But it's it's inevitable. It's something we're going to talk about. How quickly can we get there and we do qualify for the nice start, or
Don: 120,000 per bus. So it does make the equation much better. Right? You're looking at a full size bus a $100,000,
Don: and but it's off set by 120 K. And then you do the incremental math over the span. The life life, you know, lifespan of the vehicle. And hopefully you get, you know, most some of that back, right?
Joel Grayson: Yeah, do you qualify for the clean school bus program or
Don: Yeah. So that's so far, we've only been able to qualify through through the that. The why sort of we were able to. We were eligible for the Volkswagen settlement money.
Don: So but we haven't honestly we haven't purchased
Don: a new bus since the summer of 2,000, and 18.
Don: So our super selby. Probably most of that super sell the appliance super Trans. We applied super trans in 2,021.
Don: And we took all their When we bought some trends, we' all their equipment. So for first time this year we're looking at purchasing to do full-size buses. Well, I say new to us.
Don: what they'll likely be, you know
Don: it'll be late model year, but probably like, think like 2020, 2,019, just because we want to phase about what we have to.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: What what do you think are the cases that you'll one of those 2 could be
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: an electric vehicle
Don: again. It really depends on you know. I mean this, I guess Probably the biggest factor for us is the technology, right? So
Don: you know, they have some hybrid buses, or I don't know if Joe, if you ever explored the hybrid option where it's it's it's electric and fuel, so like the Fta buses.
Don: those work great. But that's kind of a technology sort of moving away from hybrid.
Don: So I mean, our limitation is that our dealer, our broker, our our major bus vendors, telling us
Don: that maybe we'd get 70 miles on a charge a day.
Don: That's not bad, but that's for us. That's we, it not. We're we're averaging more than 70 miles a day. So again, not not a big, not a deal. Break it either right because we could do the am. Run.
Don: bring the bus back to the base. recharge it to get ready for the Pm. On.
Joel Grayson: Yeah, actually, what is your average traveling
Joel Grayson: distance for? We actually put that 77 miles a day.
Joel Grayson: So I know that
Joel Grayson: there are different. Like battery sizes you can get for electric school buses. There should be like a tier above that. Certainly.
Don: Now some of our late buses like this. If you anyone has ever taken late bus service.
Don: those buses do considerably more.
Don: They'll do an ambro, a Pm. Row, and then a late bus round.
Don: and you're probably looking at over a 100 K: there.
Don: So it's very doable. It's just a concern of ours. We're we're hoping that technology evolves.
Joel Grayson: Yeah, yeah.
Joel Grayson: So is that a limitation? Are there shorter routes that could be done?
Don: They would say, I hope so. But that'd be great. Yeah, we're all gonna bring you guys down to like 40 s Street.
Joel Grayson: No more New Jersey, No one more Brooklyn.
Don: Yeah, I mean, that's very possible. That that is certainly a way to go. The other thing that would upset our culture is that
Don: our drivers don't generally return to the base after the am.
Don: and we encourage them to take the mus home somewhere near campus, but don't bring it back
Don: to our big buses. Product right way on the east side of the Bronx in Tell a base section of the Bronx, which is right just south of
Don: just south of Co-OP City.
Don: So a lot of the guys will just keep the bus in between the rocks. But the other limitation is there.
Don: There's no electricity at that location, and there's no chance of getting electricity. So we are actually looking for another space that we'd like to potentially get for the summer.
Don: which will allow us to have a bit more infrastructure than what we currently have.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: So I I'm. I'm not discouraged like it sounds like Don is like we're like getting closer, right like it feels like the the cost. Prohibition is going down a little bit, and your motivation is going up a little bit like you're. You know they're they're coming together, and the question is, what's the differential between those 2 things which you know? There, you don't have to answer at the moment the question that I have, you know. Maybe this is, for Dan is is there.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: you know, with the school ever like? If we get close with the school, ever be able to contribute to this effort? Or is it just? We're different institutions, and can't do that.
Dan Schultz: I don't. I don't know I don't really know the answer to that, like I actually felt like funding, having a having a an ownership piece, or listen I anything anything's possible, and and and it can be could be discussed. I mean it will be, it will be a new
Dan Schultz: will be a new avenue that we would be traveling down in terms of an an ownership percentage, or whatever it might be
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: just trying to cause, like you know, students, I think you hear from Don. He's like bottom line, bottom line, bottom line, and like he has to be that way, because he's the business guy right? And you know he wants to do the right thing for students and for the earth.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: and at the same time. You know the dollars are the dollars. And so, you know, just throwing ideas out there. There are 3 schools that use these roots, you know. Could could, you know? Is it? We each contribute a little bit to push you the edge for one
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: for one bus, or is it? We each push a little bit, so we can get 3 buses or something like that, you know, recognizing we are also a business, and have to pay attention to the bottom line right? And so you know the world, Hasn't yet caught up with what the you know. We're not charging
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: for what things really cost. You know there are costs to the environment and to human health that are not being factored in on a dollar amount. And so we're, we're trying to say. Can can we bring those things together so
Don: well? You know, Kelly, one thing one thing to consider, and you know glad dance on the call, You know we get to a point. Let's say it's 2026, and we really want to invest heavily.
Don: and in the the fleet for our Cs right minimally. Those 60 big bus rocks. We do. Let's make those
Don: ev vehicles.
Don: you know. We probably go back to Dan again. We're gonna make a major investment for our Cs.
Don: you know. Would you be wanting to extend the contract that you currently have with us through? So it's a 10 year period, then, that then you could. Now now you look at the bath, or you know I'm. I'm, i'm a i'm a sorry Dan, for 10 years.
Don: That's a little bit easier. The math lines up. You know much better. You know. The risk we have is let's say.
Don: you know we buy all this equipment, and think of you know 425,000
Don: times, you know, 16 buses. And then Dan turns around next week. So you know what Don Yeah. Service that where needs to be is our 60 day notice. We're gonna put you out to bid for 2223
Don: You know what I mean
Don: that's where? So again it all depends on you know what we think. We have long term relationships with all our most important partners.
Don: and maybe we can. Maybe the math can line up Kelly at some point.
Dan Schultz: Well, we currently have. We currently have a pretty sizable, long-term contract with you guys, my friend. So 8 years left yeah. All 8 years. 8 years, my my friend. So
Don: i'm just going through in my head. I'm like, When did we sign with you guys?
Don: Yeah, no, so it's it's it's it's not. It's the equations getting better every day.
Don: There's no question about it.
Joel Grayson: Why, I think we're all trying to make this work. So what incentives do we not qualify for, because we're not a public school district.
Don: So again, it's not that it's nothing that's existing necessarily, Joel, but, like that infrastructure bill. That just went through this to set it Biden signed into law if they do, and when they end up distributing their billions of dollars for the electronic bus piece, it's likely going to go through the municipalities
Don: so they'll give the the school districts the money to to be up
Don: same way. They handle that you may recall them the way they handle Covid money, too.
Don: while the Covid money came from the the Federal Government and the school systems. which still didn't necessarily help.
Don: You know, private contractors.
Don: If that makes sense, so they would probably do the same thing. They would send the money out.
Don: So the districts and the districts, who either on the buses do their own fleets. or they have the additional monies to pay the contract. The private
Don: you guys don't have that luxury
Joel Grayson: got it. I mean. Is there any way we could help you with that like
Don: I? I do think I think there is an opportunity that they you know we can explore. You know how we can ensure that
Don: these monies can be applied for and received the same similar way we're able to apply
Don: through nice sort of right.
Don: So if there's a mechanism in which you know these these monies become available, they'll become available in in grant form, probably from the Us. Government.
Don: and that money can somehow go directly to private contractors.
Don: instead of having to be filed through each city each each time when it's funneled through it. It. Private comp companies Aren't. A priority. Is that right?
Don: Like a town that is probably like my, for instance. probably 20% of school funding comes from the city of Mount Burden.
Don: The other 80% comes from the State in Federal. I mean, Dan, You know, Kelly, how much money goes to Rcs from the State and Federal Government 0%.
Dan Schultz: No? Well, we get, we, we get, we get credit. We do a thing with the State, where, because we we we show proof that we take attendance and things like that. We get some funding from the State every year, but it's it, but it's not. It's not. It's it's nothing. You know. It's it's
Dan Schultz: it's not it's not very significant.
Don: So again, Joe, i'm not saying we won't get money. I'm, i'm hopeful we will
Don: So so again I I think we got to see how it plays out. Yeah, and you know what I can do for you guys. I could actually go back to. So we actually have a consultant
Don: with our with our bus manufacturer that can break this all. You know what he anticipates in terms of grants and funding. So right now we're limited to that sort of but doesn't mean that more money is not coming.
Joel Grayson: Got it.
Don: But again i'll tell you our manufacturers. Not He's not optimistic that you know. Once everybody goes electric that the grid can handle it.
Joel Grayson: That makes sense. Yeah, well isn't it being charged, though at night. So
Joel Grayson: the demand is super low. Then
Don: yeah, ideally, I mean again, I think we need to see you know what kind of a draw that, but it has. I mean.
Don: you know. I guess, that you can to. People will be running the air conditioning at night right? So I I guess we'd have to see
Dan Schultz: I mean well infrastructure the of the grid. I I I mean
Dan Schultz: you're reading all the time about. you know, Con Edison, and the fact that they really Haven't, just using Khan as an example. But they really haven't
Dan Schultz: they haven't really kept up with their infrastructure. They haven't really kept up with that technology. They haven't they haven't put money into
Dan Schultz: areas where they should be putting things into, and it's a constant balance of, you know, taking you know powering down or taking power from certain area to to to to make sure that their demand stays where it needs to be in other areas, you know. So it it seems like they're in the summertime. They're they're always
Dan Schultz: They're always balancing, so a big part
Dan Schultz: should you know a big part should be, you know, should be playing with them as well.
Dan Schultz: because they're gonna, you know. Ultimately it needs to be supported right. It's not. It's. You know. It's something that we're moving forward with
Dan Schultz: It' be interesting to see what they would they have to say. You know it'll be interesting to see if they have a plan, or
Dan Schultz: or if they have
Joel Grayson: something in place that they're thinking about, Joel, I don't know if that's something you guys might have touched on, and you discussions and all the whole work you guys have been doing. But it's a great program. Yeah, with Con Edison.
Dan Schultz: Okay.
Joel Grayson: where the buses would actually help the grid because it balance the the demand and the load throughout the
Dan Schultz: well. My, my follow up on that would be, though. Have we asked, have we asked, what what Con Edison would be doing in terms of their own infrastructure.
Dan Schultz: Right as demand is demand decreases, and it sounds great that the charging will be happening at night. But what about the overall demand for electricity as a whole? Are they? Do They have plans to.
Dan Schultz: you know. make improvements
Dan Schultz: Well, I don't think they'll run out of electricity. No, no, I'm I'm saying it. But the the the the structure in terms of of being able to manage it.
Dan Schultz: That's what i'm talking about
Joel Grayson: the the charging infrastructure
Don: a lot of times. It's actually kind of interesting when we so when we, the
Don: if you're a home or a property owner.
Don: If you need your electric upgraded or you don't have enough power, you need more support.
Don: Yeah, you can call the Electric company, and
Don: eventually, you know, weeks or a month or 2 later they'll finally come out and do the upgrade.
Don: The the the that we want is when everyone has to do this by 2,027 right? Can they do it?
Don: And that's where we're hearing a lot of skepticism from the the that
Don: no one thinks the States can be ready for 2027 if all the all the new vehicles have to be
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: school buses, why, is that and well, it can just for one other thing in there, the you know, running out of electricity. Hopefully, we won't do that, but they do shift power around, and so we get that you guys wouldn't know this because you're not on campus in the summer. We get shut down in the summer.
Dan Schultz: They say he goes home at 12, or you Don't, get okay, because they're like it's not critical.
Dan Schultz: you know, the night before. Say, like, you know, there's going to be.
Dan Schultz: you know, a a Major, you know
Dan Schultz: Power need, and you know we need you guys to
Dan Schultz: jump off, and and you know we would send folks home to work at home or whatever. But
Dan Schultz: I mean, I think that happens all the time. That's why I was talking about that whole balancing thing.
Don: Yeah. yeah, no. Listen. I we're we're optimistic and like, I said, it's not whether you're pessimistic or optimistic. It's. It's where we're heading.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: And it also just seems like a step wise yeah, introduction of the Evs is the way to go. You start with one, you know, and maybe it's you buy one. But the other thing is, maybe you least one, and see how it goes in terms of your. You know how many miles you can manage, or something like that, like, you know. Recognizing the pace of change of the technology, you know. So that that doesn't mean. You know, students in the room don't that doesn't mean we're slowing down. That's like what we want is a
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: effective. reasonably cost-effective introduction. Right?
Don: We talked to the the evp of business at Logan.
Don: And you know they again. They dip their toe on the water last year
Don: and and bought some ev vehicles. But even, you know, talking to the Vp. Of business over there.
Don: I mean, if the if the technology really changed the next 3 or 5 years. those vehicles might already become dated. and that's the other risk. You run it. We jump in too quick.
Don: It's. It's probably gonna hurt us. Not help us. The electric vehicles you mean that you'd buy now would become outdated in fear. So you know how the technology is gonna evolve?
Joel Grayson: That's interesting, because they have been
Don: running electric vehicles since 1,994. And well, the Mta. B. Has been going for decades, right? So yeah, I'm not. This is again. I'm just telling you some of the concerns. I mean, you'll hear a lot of wild concerns i'll. I'll give you another one.
Don: You know what happens if that driver doesn't properly fuel up in between the routes. and he or she's heading down the West Side highway
Don: and hits traffic or all the George Washington Bridge, and comes to a stop. and then the charge dies.
Don: You know. Now you can argue that could happen with any vehicle. Right? That's the thing that makes us nervous is that
Don: if it's not intricate, that we're having to fuel up.
Don: you know overnight, which is, of course, perfect science. But then, if we have to fuel up every day in between the routes, and if something's best, it's gonna cause the disruption.
Joel Grayson: So I actually spoke with a manufacturer at Line Electric, and they and and looking at the website now they do have a range for 100 to 125 miles
Joel Grayson: per charge.
Joel Grayson: So
Joel Grayson: again, if we were to do this with, you know, small tests for you know the smallest route that we're doing.
Joel Grayson: It seems to me like we wouldn't need to charge in between
Joel Grayson: with a
Joel Grayson: below 77 miles per day routes. Yeah, the a. In the West Side rocks are probably your shorter roads right down the highway. I probably stay away from anything downtown and East Side, but certainly the west side buses.
Don: Yeah. yeah.
Joel Grayson: So
Joel Grayson: you said that super salv is looking to buy a bus
Joel Grayson: 2 buses soon. What does it look like with
Don: buying new infrastructure? I know buses last for 12 years old, he said. We we, we we we anticipate again. Not at some point.
Don: you know. If we buy brand new right, we we expect to utilize for for 12 years. I mean still very doable right, because 2,035 is the current mandate
Don: all AV fleets, so it's still doable. But I almost kind of feel like we're going to be in a different world in 3 or 4 years
Don: that have. Then having a new Diesel bus is not going to be in it an attractive option for us. So yeah, our our perspective is let's go get it used one now.
Don: And
Don: what's that? Use the electric vehicle. Although an electric, we we would look for gas gas fuel not Diesel, we try to get gas.
Joel Grayson: And sorry, I guess. Yeah, just for some specific numbers.
Don: How many buses do you have? And how often do you expect to replace them? And and
Don: those are the ones that you target for? Obviously the Diesel emissions, right? We probably we're gonna have start phasing in new ones and retiring older ones. I would say I would think 3 to 4 a year.
Joel Grayson: Okay.
Don: So we're actually going to retire at least 2 2,012 this year.
Don: And again they're not bad. We we, when I say, retire, we're going to sell them.
Don: We're just not going to use our our private clients just to all for our
the clients.
Joel Grayson: And when you're buying the new buses. I know Ken F brought the separate.
Joel Grayson: Could you foresee
Joel Grayson: buying some Diesel and trying out an electric one? I mean, that's sort of the conversations we we've been having with our manufacturer
Don: is, if we did want to go electrical what it looks like. And again, you know, it's through the dealership through the manufacturer.
Don: who, you know they're great at itemizing all the grants and loans you can get.
Don: So that's why we've already applied for some of the stuff that we know we're all.
Don: But again, just like, say, like, Kelly said, it goes down to the math, I mean. Yes, we can save 120,000 through nice sort of right for one purchase.
Don: But you're still paying for 20. So then you're paying 3 grand for that. That that point of paying 2 X
Don: for the vehicle, if you just plot it, you know, say 100. 2,000. 530,000
Don: But again like you said, then you do the math over 10 years
Don: cheaper to own, and the fuel economy is better.
Joel Grayson: Hmm.
Don: Like length of our contract, like I I don't know that makes me feel really optimistic. We might be able to like
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: agree, you know, to try one. You know the I don't. I don't know if there's a way to I don't know. Push this forward to like. Take one step, you know I we're trying to make sure that we hear bottom line, but also.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: you know.
Don: Push for it, Kelly. Sorry it's not. I don't. I don't think we'd be having this conversation. It wasn't possible
Don: so so I I think we gotta get there. and if that means we can, you know, take one small step now. It's not the end of the world. you know.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: when's the time frame to make those decisions?
Don: Oh, again, I think we would do it locked up with our media factor. I still don't think we. I think we've only scratched the service in terms of what the the Federal Government is going to provide
Don: the State governments, so I think we got to see more and more of it. And I think you know, I guess the laws we keep a Democrat in office.
Don: you know. So so hopefully, like, I said hopefully. We'll get more money there, and it'll be. you know again. You know. I just My big fear is that you don't want a business model in which all the families that are Cs.
Don: I'm gonna have to pay for a bunch of boss. You know what I mean. That's what you know. That's you know we're trying to protect families from having to invest too much money into daily transportation.
Joel Grayson: although if i'm correct because of the return on investment of 9 years with no incentives. And then that $110,000 from Nicerda that would make the return on investment much quicker, so that factor into the
Don: that doesn't line up really in our area, Joel, but it can. You also get a factor in finance fees for
Don: the purchase.
Don: which again, like you said. There are just kind of rates out there right that you can get
Don: through, you know, through grass and walls. so it's not impossible. But the numbers
Don: we were going to do a case Study on what the numbers that up?
Don: I don't think we're quite there yet.
Joel Grayson: Hmm.
Don: Forget about the infrastructure challenges. Right? What is does the math? Is it? Is it less expensive to do, Ev.
Don: then? Few than gas fuel or Diesel right now? No. so make much more sense.
Don: you know. Morally, yes, environmentally. Yes, those are all. Yes, there's no question about it. Are we headed there? Yes.
Don: you know. So again it's it's where we're going on.
Don: So the economics don't line up today.
Joel Grayson: So what if the next 2 buses we're going to buy this year?
Joel Grayson: One of them were electric, and somehow the Hill schools could organize to divvy up that additional premium that goes into buying an electric bus among the 3 schools.
Joel Grayson: And then, when you'd have those operational
Joel Grayson: when those operational costs, like fuel and maintenance.
Don: end up saving you money. Then, somehow that money could come back.
Don: the infrastructure cost, and then the the other side. Ledger says what you're saving.
Don: You come to. What is that Delta? And then you would just go ahead and
Don: and say this, the search argument so we could just it's just a math problem, Joan.
Joel Grayson: by doing it with only like.
Joel Grayson: maybe half or through the buses that we're doing like every third bus is an electric that we're going to buy. Then that that surcharge could also be smaller.
Don: Do you do you think that could be possible to. You know one of our, you know our biggest clients like ours, you know. You probably have 8 or 900 families.
Don: you know, participate in the transportation program. So yeah, I mean, it is very possible to say, okay. you know, maybe there's 2 rates. It's the rate. If we do know we need next year.
Don: and this is the rate of if we can add 2 buses to the police.
Don: I mean I i'm
Dan Schultz: it it's a it's a process of discussion. But I mean, we've already talked about setting our rates for this year.
Dan Schultz: Oh, yeah, yeah, You know what i'm saying. So Our rates are set for going into the contractual 2324 school year. So those are already set
Don: right. No, no, just over time there that you know, again. you know, if we do purchase the 2 vehicles we purchase, or
Don: we intend to put it. How Hebrew.
Don: which one of our clients we don't have any older.
Don: The bus fleet at our Cs is a little bit newer than
Don: some are smaller clients. But again, anything's possible to all. So it's. So the buses are actually separate. They're not shared like
Joel Grayson: fleets for every separate school.
Don: What does our smaller accounts tend to get the older bosses.
Don: Our larger, more valued clients get the newer losses.
Don: So. So we are. Fees go well, I mean, I guess it. It can work
Don: if we phase out to how Hebrew vehicles. I could probably pull 2 older Rcs vehicles and use them there.
Don: So anything's pause.
Joel Grayson: Hmm.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: So what I I i'm just noticing it's 50'clock, and I know Mr. Shalt has to go, and I have to go as well, Don. I wonder if you could when you when you're you. I know you work with the consultant, you know, and they're giving you the prices and trying to figure out what the incentives are. Would you be willing to come back to us when that decision making time is.
Don: Yeah, Kelly, you do the words right on my mouth. What I can do is I can set up a meeting.
Don: I just do a dinner meeting or lunch meeting with the with the manufacturer and the consult.
Don: and i'll just say to them, You know, guys, just what would it look like if we wanted to do this, how could we? What's the best way to make it happen now? Of course they're all saying, don't do it yet. That's but but there is a May all right. I understand what you're saying. It does make sense.
Don: you know, from a you know. economical standpoint today.
Don: But if we really want to do it. Maybe it's not purchasing buses this year, but next year. you know, we'll be on the contract for next year with an Ev bus, you know. What would that look like? What would that cost?
Don: And then it comes down to okay. It's gonna cost X amount of dollars.
Don: and you know. Maybe if it's negligible, it's something we can, you know. Talk about
Don: passing on to our clients in school year 2424, 25
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: that that that makes sense to me to, you know, like when you're at the moment of like having clear sense of what the costs are, and you know we you can think about it from your end. We can do our math and see if we can convince you the you know that the you know, despite the differential now. The cost savings would be, you know, in X number of years, and and.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: you know, have a Have repeat this conversation then. So do you know when that would be the timeframe.
Don: I could have a a meeting with them this week. It's really it's.
Don: you know we've we've we've got. We have a relationship with the manufacturers. We've
Don: you know we have multiple properties, right? So our other company we have 550 vehicles with. So we're
Don: quite often buying bands with with these guys. So we're we're a pretty important client to them. so I could. I could arrange for meeting in pretty short order.
Kelley (she/her) Nicholson-Flynn: Okay, and then you want to get back to us, or how do you want to handle that?
Don: Yeah, if you want? In fact, you want to put a meeting on the calendar for a couple of weeks. That's more than enough time if that helps you guys. Yeah, let's do it. First week of April for folks at Riverdale, I. This week, and next week I think, are not good. So yeah, actually make it the second week, April, because the first week, April i'm away.
Joel Grayson: Okay, Second week of April.
Don: So we'll we'll, you know. I'll have the manufacturer. The consultant tells us about. You know the viability of buying when we should buy.
Don: what loans, what grants they feel, we would definitely be entitled to.
Don: What are they speculated for? That's coming down the road from Federal State local governments. and it's going to be distributed. So if I was making a proposal to you guys saying.
Don: we really want to do, Ev, this is how we can do it and try to. You know from the perspective that I've tried to with you on as a client.
Don: Yeah, I guess that's where that's the way I would go about doing it.
Joel Grayson: and if we could calculate that price differential for one bus, and talk about how you know every third bus or so could be electric. And then think about financing that I think that would be great for the for the next meeting to to have a price differential estimate.
Don: Yeah, I think we said. I think we can again remember. Things will evolve. We think the economic equation is going to get better.
Don: So again, it's not a question of. Is it doable? Yes, probably is what? When and like you said. But that's what I could lead with the with the manufacturer.
Joel Grayson: Alright, Thank you so much. I think we're good. Do you have? Any Anyways, we can help you Further.
Don: I think I got it, you know. I mean, listen. Electronic vehicles or something we don't talk about every single day, but certainly it's it's topic that comes up quite a bit.
Don: You know we wanna we really want to do it. Not not. You know. We we don't want to do the superficial, you know.
Don: Dip the toll on the water like some of these municipalities have, or even like Logan has.
Don: You know it's gonna be part of a long-term strategy right. You know. My plans are going to phase it in over time. Right?
Don: We will want, like you said, similar approach to right. Maybe every third vehicle now is Eb, that maybe every 2, every second vehicle.
Don: and then by 2,027 we can only buy. You'd be, anyway. So like I said it's it's inevitability. It's just a question of how fast we get there
Dan Schultz: all right. Thank you. All
Joel Grayson: all right.